Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) System Documentation

Introduction:

Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) combines document retrieval with text generation to produce accurate, context-aware responses. This document explains the key components, implementation, and usage of the RAG system.

System Overview:

The RAG system is composed of the following main parts:

PDF Reader: Extracts raw text from a PDF document.

Text Splitter: Breaks down large text into smaller, manageable chunks.

Embedding Model: Uses Sentence Transformer to create vector representations of text chunks.

Vector Database: Qdrant stores and retrieves vectors based on query relevance.

Generative Model: Uses Hugging Face's GPT-2 for text generation based on the retrieved chunks.


Implementation Details:

1. Reading the PDF:

Utilizes the fitz library to read and extract text from PDF documents.

2. Text Splitting:
Uses Sentence Splitter for breaking text into sentences.

Implements RecursiveCharacterTextSplitter to create uniform text chunks.

3. Embedding with SentenceTransformer:

Converts text chunks into embeddings using the all-MiniLM-L6-v2 model.

Embeddings are stored in Qdrant for efficient retrieval.

4. Retrieval and Generation:

Queries are converted into embeddings.

Qdrant returns the top 5 relevant chunks.

Hugging Face's pipeline with GPT-2 generates a coherent response.

Usage Instructions:

Setup Requirements:

Qdrant must be running locally on localhost:6333.

Required libraries include:

-pymupdf (fitz)

-qdrant-client

-sentence_transformers

-transformers

Execution Steps:

Provide the path to the PDF file.

Run the script sequentially to:

Read and split the text.

Store embeddings.

Retrieve and generate a response.

Sample Query:
query = "What is Retrieval-Augmented Generation?"
response = retrieve_and_generate(query)
print(response)

Error Handling:

The system includes basic exception handling to catch and print errors during response generation.

Ensure Qdrant and Hugging Face models are properly set up before running the script.


Optimization Opportunities:

Caching: Implement caching to reduce embedding computations.

Model Fine-Tuning: Fine-tune GPT-2 on domain-specific data.

Scalability: Deploy using load balancing for high-demand environments.


Conclusion:

This RAG system demonstrates how integrating retrieval with generation improves the relevance and accuracy of responses. With scalable deployment and potential optimizations, this system can be adapted for various real-world applications.


